 [229] _Renown’d for justice and for length of days_, Arrian. de Exp.
 Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people,
 which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness. Some
 authors have regarded the phrase “Hippomolgian,” _i.e._ “milking their
 mares,” as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes, since the oldest
 of the Samatian nomads made their mares’ milk one of their chief
 articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this passage, has
 occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as we read it,
 either “long-lived,” or “bowless,” the latter epithet indicating that
 they did not depend upon archery for subsistence.

 [230] Compare Chapman’s quaint, bold verses:—

“And as a round piece of a rocke, which with a winter’s flood
Is from his top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud,
Hath broke the naturall band it had within the roughftey rock,
Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding everie shocke,
And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay,
And then (tho’ never so impelled), it stirs not any way:—
So Hector,—”

 [231] This book forms a most agreeable interruption to the continuous
 round of battles, which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is as
 well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many notes
 unnecessary.

 [232] _Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed.

 [233] Compare Tasso:—

Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille
Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,
Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille
Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci.”

Gier. Lib. xvi. 25

 [234] Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando
 Furioso, bk. vi.

 [235]
“Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main—
Around my person wait, and bear my train:
Succeed my wish, and second my design,
The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine.”

Dryden’s Virgil, Æn. i. 107, seq.

 [236] _And Minos_. “By Homer, Minos is described as the son of
 Jupiter, and of the daughter of Phœnix, whom all succeeding authors
 name Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of
 Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
 Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow
 his descent to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy
 recorded by later writers, he is likewise the adopted son of Asterius,
 as descendant of Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus connected with a
 colony said to have been led into Creta by Tentamus, or Tectamus, son
 of Dorus, who is related either to have crossed over from Thessaly, or
 to have embarked at Malea after having led his followers by land into
 Laconia.”—Thirlwall, p. 136, seq.

 [237] Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our
 first parents:—

“Underneath the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
’Broider’d the ground.”

—“Paradise Lost,” iv. 700.

 [238] _He lies protected_.

“Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
By angels many and strong, who interpos’d
Defence, while others bore him on their shields
Back to his chariot, where it stood retir’d
From off the files of war; there they him laid,
Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame.”

“Paradise Lost,” vi. 335, seq.

 [239] _The brazen dome_. See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142.

 [240] _For, by the gods! who flies_. Observe the bold ellipsis of “he
 cries,” and the transition from the direct to the oblique
 construction. So in Milton:—

“Thus at their shady lodge arriv’d, both stood,
Both turn’d, and under open sky ador’d
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
Which they beheld, the moon’s resplendent globe,
And starry pole.—Thou also mad’st the night,
Maker omnipotent, and thou the day.”

Milton, “Paradise Lost,” Book iv.

 [241] _So some tall rock_.

“But like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves
The raging tempest, and the rising waves—
Propp’d on himself he stands: his solid sides
Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides.”

Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 809.

 [242] Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he
 leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the
 Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on
 Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in
 the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus.

 [243] _His best beloved_. The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall
 (Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the
 friendship subsisting between these two heroes—
    “One of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character,
    is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate
    and durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in
    the earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the
    comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but
    the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were
    maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic
    companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in
    traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the
    same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a
    wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to
    die for one another. It is true that the relation between them is
    not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance
    which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical
    description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
    presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of
    Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may
    owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even
    dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the
    period to which the traditions are referred. The argument of the
    Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus,
    whose love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for
    his higher birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard
    which united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus,
    though, as the persons themselves are less important, it is kept
    more in the back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet in the
    same light. The idea of a Greek hero seems not to have been thought
    complete, without such a brother in arms by his side.”—Thirlwall,
    Greece, vol. i. p. 176, seq.

 [244]
“As hungry wolves with raging appetite,
Scour through the fields, ne’er fear the stormy night—
Their whelps at home expect the promised food,
And long to temper their dry chaps in blood—
So rush’d we forth at once.”

—Dryden’s Virgil, ii. 479.

 [245] _The destinies ordain_.—“In the mythology, also, of the Iliad,
 purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important truth unconsciously
 involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst the nearly
 equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter is
 popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is assigned to
 fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men is absolute
 and uncontrollable. This seems to be the true character of the Homeric
 deity, and it is very necessary that the student of Greek literature
 should bear it constantly in mind. A strong instance in the Iliad
 itself to illustrate this position, is the passage where Jupiter
 laments to Juno the approaching death of Sarpedon. ‘Alas me!’ says he
 ‘since it is fated (moira) that Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should
 be slain by Patroclus, the son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is
 divided within me while I ruminate it in my mind, whether having
 snatched him up from out of the lamentable battle, I should not at
 once place him alive in the fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether
 I should now destroy him by the hands of the son of Menoetius!’ To
 which Juno answers—‘Dost thou mean to rescue from death a mortal man,
 long since destined by fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do it—but we,
 the rest of the gods, do not sanction it.’ Here it is clear from both
 speakers, that although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter
 might still, if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of
 the reach of any such event, and further, in the alternative, that
 Jupiter himself would destroy him by the hands of another.”—Coleridge,
 p. 156. seq.

 [246] _Thrice at the battlements_. “The art military of the Homeric
 age is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
 personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
 ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale. The
 chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights of
 romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
 captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a ditch
 or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself was
 accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of earth
 with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in armour. The
 Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive assistance from
 their allies to the very end.”—Coleridge, p. 212.

 [247] _Ciconians_.—A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

 [248] _They wept_.

“Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
Weeps his associates and his master slain.”

Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

“Nothing is heard upon the mountains now,
But pensive herds that for their master low,
Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
Unmindful of their pasture and their love.”

Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._

“To close the pomp, Æthon, the steed of state,
Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
Stripp’d of his trappings, with a sullen pace
He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face.”

Dryden’s Virgil, bk. ii

 [249] _Some brawny bull_.

“Like to a bull, that with impetuous spring
Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow
Hath struck him, but unable to proceed
Plunges on either side.”

—Carey’s Dante: Hell, c. xii.

 [250] This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the
 regular narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and
 the lamentations of Achilles.

 [251] _Far in the deep_. So Oceanus hears the lamentations of
 Prometheus, in the play of Æschylus, and comes from the depths of the
 sea to comfort him.

 [252] Opuntia, a city of Locris.

 [253] Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his
 description of the shield of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr.
 Dyce’s version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be
 introduced.

“In the wide circle of the shield were seen
Refulgent images of various forms,
The work of Vulcan; who had there described
The heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea,
The winds, the clouds, the moon, the sun, apart
In different stations; and you there might view
The stars that gem the still-revolving heaven,
And, under them, the vast expanse of air,
In which, with outstretch’d wings, the long-beak’d bird
Winnow’d the gale, as if instinct with life.
Around the shield the waves of ocean flow’d,
The realms of Tethys, which unnumber’d streams,
In azure mazes rolling o’er the earth,
Seem’d to augment.”

 [254] _On seats of stone_. “Several of the old northern Sagas
 represent the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting
 on great stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring”—
 Grote, ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in
 The heroic times, see Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 166.

 [255] _Another part_, &c.

“And here
Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale
Were heroes lying with their slaughter’d steeds
Upon the ground incarnadin’d with blood.
Stern stalked Bellona, smear’d with reeking gore,
Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,
And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife
Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames:
Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape
Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng,
Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;
And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
Such were the horrors of dire war.”

—Dyce’s Calaber.

 [256] _A field deep furrowed_.

“Here was a corn field; reapers in a row,
Each with a sharp-tooth’d sickle in his hand,
Work’d busily, and, as the harvest fell,
Others were ready still to bind the sheaves:
Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away
The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here
The plough were drawing, and the furrow’d glebe
Was black behind them, while with goading wand
The active youths impell’d them. Here a feast
Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre
A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
As if endued with life.”
—Dyce’s Calaber.

 [257] Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently
 compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by
 Hesiod. He remarks that, “with two or three exceptions, the imagery
 differs in little more than the names and arrangements; and the
 difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether for
 the worse. The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs no
 exposition: it constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the work.
 The Hesiodic images are huddled together without connection or
 congruity: Mars and Pallas are awkwardly introduced among the Centaurs
 and Lapithae;— but the gap is wide indeed between them and Apollo with
 the Muses, waking the echoes of Olympus to celestial harmonies; whence
 however, we are hurried back to Perseus, the Gorgons, and other images
 of war, over an arm of the sea, in which the sporting dolphins, the
 fugitive fishes, and the fisherman on the shore with his casting net,
 are minutely represented. As to the Hesiodic images themselves, the
 leading remark is, that they catch at beauty by ornament, and at
 sublimity by exaggeration; and upon the untenable supposition of the
 genuineness of this poem, there is this curious peculiarity, that, in
 the description of scenes of rustic peace, the superiority of Homer is
 decisive—while in those of war and tumult it may be thought, perhaps,
 that the Hesiodic poet has more than once the advantage.”

 [258] “This legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in
 the Grecian Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas
 familiar to the old epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes and
 the endless toil and endurances of Heracles, the most renowned
 subjugator of all the semi-divine personages worshipped by the
 Hellenes,—a being of irresistible force, and especially beloved by
 Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to obey the
 commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is
 reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are
 brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives
 in marriage Hebe.”—Grote, vol. i. p. 128.

 [259] _Ambrosia_.

“The blue-eyed maid,
In ev’ry breast new vigour to infuse.
Brings nectar temper’d with ambrosial dews.”

Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, vi. 249.

 [260] “Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He
 stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth
 upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the
 cloud is not rent under them.” Job xxvi. 6-8.

 [261]
“Swift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,v Slain by Jove’s wrath,
and led by Hermes’ rod,
Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode.”

Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

 [262] These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might
 be delayed, but never wholly set aside.

 [263] It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal,
 to behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

 [264]
“Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow’rs arose,
In humble vales they built their soft abodes.”

Dryden’s Virgil, iii. 150.

 [265] _Along the level seas_. Compare Virgil’s description of Camilla,
 who

“Outstripp’d the winds in speed upon the plain,
Flew o’er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
She swept the seas, and, as she skimm’d along,
Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung.”

Dryden, vii. 1100.

 [266] _The future father_. “Æneas and Antenor stand distinguished from
 the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy with
 the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as treacherous
 collusion,—a suspicion indirectly glanced at, though emphatically
 repelled, in the Æneas of Virgil.”—Grote, i. p. 427.

 [267] Neptune thus recounts his services to Æneas:

“When your Æneas fought, but fought with odds
Of force unequal, and unequal gods:
I spread a cloud before the victor’s sight,
Sustain’d the vanquish’d, and secured his flight—
Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
The vow’d destruction of ungrateful Troy.”

Dryden’s Virgil, v. 1058.

 [268] _On Polydore_. Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that
 Polydore was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor, for
 protection, being the youngest of Priam’s sons, and that he was
 treacherously murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent
 with him.

 [269] “Perhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of
 poetical fancy is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the
 Iliad, he has brought the river god Scamander, first with Achilles,
 and afterwards with Vulcan, when summoned by Juno to the hero’s aid.
 The overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation
 in the character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
 Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to be
 easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
 mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may
 suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of
 Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same ready
 explanation from physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the flood at
 the critical moment when the hero’s destruction appeared imminent,
 might, by a slight extension of the figurative parallel, be ascribed
 to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all atmospheric
 moisture.”—Mure, vol. i. p. 480, sq.

 [270] Wood has observed, that “the circumstance of a falling tree,
 which is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other,
 affords a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander.”

 [271] _Ignominious_. Drowning, as compared with a death in the field
 of battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.

 [272] _Beneath a caldron_.

“So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
Above the brims they force their fiery way;
Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.”

Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 644.

 [273] “This tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by
 order of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not
 unfrequently among the incidents of the Mythical world.”—Grote, vol.
 i. p. 156.

 [274] _Not half so dreadful_.

“On the other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burn’d,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war.”

—“Paradise Lost,” xi. 708.

 [275] “And thus his own undaunted mind explores.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi.
 113.

 [276] The example of Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties
 of the laundry were not thought derogatory, even from the dignity of a
 princess, in the heroic times.

 [277] _Hesper shines with keener light_.

“Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn.”

“Paradise Lost,” v. 166.

 [278] Such was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he
 was slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the
 unerring auspices of Apollo. The greatest efforts were made by the
 Trojans to possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued
 and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses.
 Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it
 with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of
 immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine.

 [279] _Astyanax_, i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that
 Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have
 copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus.

 [280] This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book,
 but it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for
 comparison.

 [281] _Thrice in order led_. This was a frequent rite at funerals. The
 Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio_. Plutarch
 states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to
 the memory of Achilles himself.

 [282] _And swore_. Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to
 witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436.

 [283]
“O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
Art thou so late return’d for our defence?
Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
With length of labours, and with, toils of war?
After so many funerals of thy own,
Art thou restored to thy declining town?
But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
Deforms the manly features of thy face?”

Dryden, xi. 369.

 [284] _Like a thin smoke_. Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.

“In vain I reach my feeble hands to join
In sweet embraces—ah! no longer thine!
She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair
Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air.”

Dryden.

 [285] So Milton:—

“So eagerly the fiend
O’er bog, o’er steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.”

“Paradise Lost,” ii. 948.

 [286]
“An ancient forest, for the work design’d
(The shady covert of the savage kind).
The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed:
Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow’ring pride
Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
High trunks of trees, fell’d from the steepy crown
Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.”

Dryden’s Virgil, vi. 261.

 [287] _He vowed_. This was a very ancient custom.

 [288] The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity
 of the deceased, and the honour in which he was held.

 [289] On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern
 nations, see Mallet, p. 213.

 [290] _And calls the spirit_. Such was the custom anciently, even at
 the Roman funerals.

“Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
Paternal ashes, now revived in vain.”

Dryden’s Virgil, v. 106.

 [291] Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better
 moral from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve
 comparison:—

“The haughty Dares in the lists appears:
Walking he strides, his head erected bears:
His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
And loud applauses echo through the field.
* * * *
Such Dares was, and such he strode along,
And drew the wonder of the gazing throng
His brawny breast and ample chest he shows;
His lifted arms around his head he throws,
And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
His match is sought, but, through the trembling band,
No one dares answer to the proud demand.
Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes,
Already he devours the promised prize.
* * * *
If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?”

Dryden’s Virgil, v. 486, seq.

 [292]
“The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
His mouth and nostrils pour’d a purple flood,
And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.”

Dryden’s Virgil, v. 623.

 [293] “Troilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also
 in the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an
 object of great interest with the subsequent poets.”—Grote, i, p. 399.

 [294] Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of
 Gabriel, “Paradise Lost,” bk. v. 266, seq.

“Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air. * * * *
* * * *
At once on th’ eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A seraph wing’d. * * * *
Like Maia’s son he stood,
And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fill’d
The circuit wide.”

Virgil, Æn. iv. 350:—

“Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
And whether o’er the seas or earth he flies,
With rapid force they bear him down the skies
But first he grasps within his awful hand
The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;
With this he draws the ghost from hollow graves;
With this he drives them from the Stygian waves:
* * * *
Thus arm’d, the god begins his airy race,v And drives the racking
clouds along the liquid space.”

Dryden.

 [295] In reference to the whole scene that follows, the remarks of
 Coleridge are well worth reading:—
    “By a close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of
    expressing everything, Homer was enabled to venture upon the most
    peculiar and difficult situations, and to extricate himself from
    them with the completest success. The whole scene between Achilles
    and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose
    of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly
    skilful, and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the
    Iliad. Quinctilian has taken notice of the following speech of
    Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which is so transcendent, that if
    genius did not often, especially in oratory, unconsciously fulfil
    the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced, on this
    account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is
    called spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the
    poem. Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of
    Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his father; in
    gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; and,
    lastly, mentioning Hector’s name when he perceives that the hero is
    softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of
    the conqueror. The ego d’eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha
    geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the
    Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage
    defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no
    name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can
    only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to
    transfuse it into another language.”—Coleridge, p. 195.

 [296] “Achilles’ ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot
 but offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic
 age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive
 vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated by
 the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that evil
 inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured man; but
 made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the fate of the
 body from which it had separated. Hence a denial of the rites
 essential to the soul’s admission into the more favoured regions of
 the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on the dreary
 shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost of Patroclus
 to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own obsequies, shows
 how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his destroyer must
 have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which, even after death,
 was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades. Hence before yielding
 up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks pardon of Patroclus for
 even this partial cession of his just rights of retribution.”—Mure,
 vol. i. 289.

 [297] Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

“Here, from the tow’r by stern Ulysses thrown,
Andromache bewail’d her infant son.”

Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

 [298] The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant
 and interesting view of Helen’s character—
    “Few things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand
    that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
    also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is
    through the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech,
    noble in her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which
    higher powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate
    towards those with whom that fault had committed her. I have always
    thought the following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and
    hints at her own invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as
    almost the sweetest passage in the poem. It is another striking
    instance of that refinement of feeling and softness of tone which
    so generally distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the
    rest.”—Classic Poets, p. 198, seq.

 [299] “And here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to
 exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied
 him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of
 his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
 influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of his
 great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a few
 short days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself to be
 suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise.
    The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed throughout the
    Iliad, to the speedy termination of its hero’s course, and the
    moral on the vanity of human life which they indicate, are among
    the finest evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the
    whole framework of the poem is united.”—Mure, vol. i. p 201.

 [300] Cowper says,—“I cannot take my leave of this noble poem without
 expressing how much I am struck with the plain conclusion of it. It is
 like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has entertained
 magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not contemptuous, yet
 without much ceremony.” Coleridge, p. 227, considers the termination
 of “Paradise Lost” somewhat similar.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


